So now let's talk a little bit
about numbers and lengths.
This is essential to almost any
code that uses custom properties.
So to demonstrate the point I want to
make here, we have a rather contrived
example where we use a width and
height that is set in viewport units so
that we could display what shape
your viewport is currently in.
Yeah, I know, not something you do very
frequently but bear with me for a bit.
And notice that since I'm
using viewport units,
every time I resize this, it adapts.
So, Someone who's very,
very much into avoiding repetition could
say I don't like repeating this number,
I wanna set a variable.
So the first attempt might
be to use a variable,
let's call it P with a 50, and
then go here and do something like this.
This is very common in people
that have used SAS a lot.
And now it doesn't work.
Why doesn't this work?
So the reason this doesn't
work is because variable
values cannot contain parts of tokens.
If you write something like that,
the browser actually understands 50 and
vw, not 50vw.
So what are tokens?
Tokens are the most essential
parts of CSS values.
The most basic syntax components
that cannot be broken further,
essentially, the atoms of CSS syntax.
And variable values are token lists,
they can contain one token,
they can contain more tokens, but
they cannot contain half a token.
So what is a token in practice?
Cuz saying that they are essentially the
atoms of CSS syntax is a little hand wavy.
So these examples are taken pretty
much directly from the spec, so tokens
are keywords such as none, for example,
or any other keyword that CSS includes.
Numbers, lengths, but notice that
numbers and lengths are distinct tokens.
If you have a number token, you cannot
combine it with something else and
make a length token.
Degree angles, percentages, all the
punctuation that property values include,
like commas,
slashes the opening part of a function,
like the function name and
the opening parenthesis.
The closing parenthesis is
an individual token, a hash is a token.
A string is a token.
And there's a very special case that
the URL function is an entire token.
It's not URL and
the opening parenthesis that is a token,
unlike any other function,
the entire URL is a token.
This is because when CSS first started,
URLs could be either be quoted or
unquoted.
So to enable this feature,
the entire functional
had to be a token and
cannot be broken further.
And lastly, white space is a token.
So here's a quiz, and
obviously, I don't expect you
to know the answer, but
what do you think makes sense?
If you have linear gradient and
an opening parenthesis, can you store it
in a variable and then just use
a variable to control the gradient type?
Do you think this is valid or invalid CSS?
>> One person said valid,
one person said invalid.
>> Yeah, so opinions are split.
Based on what I've told you so
far, it should be valid.
However, it is not because there
is an additional rule that custom
properties cannot contain opening
parenthesis, opening braces,
opening square brackets,
any of these structures.
And actually not only is this invalid, but
what actually happens is really weird,
so let's open this in a new tab.
So notice that actually no
background gets applied.
Let's inspect and
see what's going on here.
So notice this here,
the next declaration was
actually consumed as part of the value.
So not only can variable values not
contain unmatch parenthesis, square
brackets, and curly braces, but they
actually break kind of badly when they do.
Now here's a slightly different example,
also with gradients,
where the stops are stored in a variable.
And then we use that variable and
the gradient, and
notice that the stops variable
also contains a trailing comma.
What do you think?
Would that be invalid?
>> You used it earlier, so
I would say yes, valid.
>> I used it earlier but
not with a trailing comma.
Anyway, it is actually valid because
comma is just another token,
so all we have here is
still a list of tokens.
There's white, there's comma, there's
black, there's another comma, that's fine.
What about this?
We have the two keyword in a custom
property, and then we're using that.
It's kind of contrived, but
still kind of interesting.
So I'm just gonna go ahead with
this one and it is still valid,
it looks really weird, it looks like
it ought to not be valid, but it is.
And this means that we
could actually have custom
properties that fill in as much
as we want from a property.
Like here we have a 3D with shadow
custom property that if we set it,
it invokes this entire thing and whatever
we want to fill in here as the last layer.
So we could invoke it by just
setting it to whitespace and
then we essentially have
a pointless last layer.
We could set just the color,
Rebecca purple, and
then we still have a last layer,
it's just not very visible.
Let me zoom in and you'll see
that a tiny bit of purple there,
or we could also fill in, A blur.
Like as many tokens as we want.
So essentially that way we can create
single property mixins in a sense.
Kind of like function currying for whoever
knows that, well, that is in JavaScript.
It's like when you backfill
function arguments.
So let's go back to our
original broken example.
What can we do here to fix it?
How can we actually use 50 and
then get viewport units?
It's a little more verbose but
we can actually do it.
All we need is to use calc and multiply
the 50 by one of whatever unit we want.
And there we are, and now we can change
the P in one place and it just adapts.
Now some people might be wondering what
if we tried to simplify it a little
bit by setting p to 45vw, for example,
that we can just use directly here.
And then here we will divide it first
by 1vw and then multiply it by 1vh,
so that ought to work,
but it doesn't work yet.
Like I said, we do plan to
eventually allow division by length,
but right now that doesn't
work in any browser.
So we're stuck with multiplying numbers to
make units everywhere, we cannot divide.
The fact that we can not divide
means that if we have a number,
we can convert it to a unit by just
multiplying with one of that unit.
But if we have a number with a unit,
say a length or an angle or something,
we cannot get a number or any other unit,
we cannot go anywhere from that.
If we have a length, if we have,
say, ten pixels in a variable,
that's all we can use,
we can't convert it into anything else.
So I would strongly urge you to use
variables for pure data not CSS values,
unless they are like intermediate helper
variables that you're using for something.
But especially for the API that you're
exposing to people customizing,
your components, your CSS,
try to use pure data as much as you can.
Cuz you can always convert
them to whatever you need, but
you can't go back once you have length.